Aquaculture is a fast growing activity along the north and northeastern coast affecting several inshore ecosystems such as mangroves, sand barriers and lagoons. The highest impact comes from shrimp cultivation, which is starting to be implemented in the states of Ceará, Rio Grande do Norte, Paraíba, Maranhão and Pernambuco, resulting in massive destruction of mangroves and associated ecosystems. Large-scale shrimp cultivation is also affecting the livelihood of artisanal fishers as they are losing their traditional fishing areas.
Fisheries assessment research has gone through distinct phases over the years (Castello and Haimovici, 1991). The first strategy for assessing fish stocks was implemented in the late 1950s with the establishment of a national system of fisheries statistics and assessment of industrial fishing fleets. The next stage, initiated during the 1970s, aimed at surveying and assessing the productive potential of fish stocks along the coast (Neiva and Moura, 1977). During the 1980s and 1990s, the Environmental Agency (IBAMA) established a system of technical working groups, Grupos Permanentes de Estudo (GPE), for each of the main fisheries resources (i.e. shrimps, demersal fishes, sardine, lobsters, snappers and tunas). The objective of the GPEs was to provide recommendations for both management and research based on the analysis of biological, technological and socio-economic information of these major resources. Thus, for most of these stocks there are estimates of biomass, optimal exploitation rates, and maximum sustainable yield obtained through the application of assessment models that range from simple production models to Virtual Population Analysis.
Not much has been done to assess in a systematic and continuous way the status of the less abundant and diverse fish stocks targeted by artisanal fisheries, in part because of the lack of data, but also because of a lack of attention from government agencies. However, some localized research initiatives have been carried out by universities and research institutes. Tables 3 to 6 and Figure 4 summarize the available information on the status of stocks targeted by artisanal fisheries in each of the coastal regions (Vasconcellos et al., 2007); this information is discussed in the text sections below. The results are based on published assessments of the status of marine fisheries stocks, analysis of time-series of landings of artisanal fisheries compiled by Freire (2003) and Vasconcellos et al. (2007) for the period 1980 to 2002, and the list of species that are threatened by extinction, overfished and threatened by overexploitation included in Annexes I and II of Norm No. 5, 21 May 2004, Ministry of Environment.
Information on the status of stocks of importance for small-scale (or artisanal) fisheries in north Brazil is scarce. Most of the information available refers to stocks that are also important to industrial fisheries, such as shrimp, lobster, catfish, and the southern red snapper (Table 3). The pink shrimp is under intense fishing pressure, and is probably exploited at its maximum biologically sustainable level, whereas the stocks of the seabob shrimp could possibly sustain higher catches. Recent reported landings of lobsters are very close to the predicted maximum sustainable yield, which indicates that the stock is probably fully exploited. The stock of catfish shows signs of recovery after being overfished for many years. The stock of southern red snapper has also recovered from a state of overfishing, but is now considered under high risk of becoming overfished again. The status of the stock(s) of the mangrove crab is unknown. Landing statistics indicate a decrease of about 50% in production since the early 1980s, although it is difficult to ascertain if the decrease is due to overfishing, or to the deterioration of the data collection system for fisheries statistics. All of the above species are listed in Annex II of the IN No. 5/2004, and are either overexploited or threatened by overexploitation. The total reported landings of these species for 2002 represents approximately 13% of the small-scale fisheries production in northern Brazil. The exploitation status of the remaining stocks is unknown. Through the analysis of trends in fisheries landings by species, Vasconcellos et al. (2007) concluded that there is a total of 74 small-scale fisheries stocks in the northern region, and that 27% of these stocks are in a developing stage, 24% are in a mature stage, 41% are in senescent stage, 4% in recovery and 3% collapsed (Figure 4). Approximately 56% of the total stocks could possibly sustain higher catches if managed sustainably in the future, while the remaining 44% (composed of stocks in a senescent or collapsed stage) are probably overfished.
Exploitation status and relative importance to small-scale fisheries of previously assessed marine stocks in north Brazil. The relative importance of a species is expressed in tonnes and as a percentage of the species catches to the total small-scale fisheries landings in the region. Species are classified according to IN No. 5/2004, ‘I’ being species threatened by extinction and ‘II’ being species that are overexploited or threatened by overexploitation
Very few stocks have been assessed in northeast Brazil (as defined in Vasconcellos et al., 2007). The northeast region encompasses the northeast and part of the east biophysical regions in Figure 2. The available information is summarized in Table 4. Stocks of lobsters are being overfished and show a decreasing trend in landings since the 1990s. Stocks of the two main Lutjanidae species, the yellowtail snapper and the vermilion snapper, are either intensively exploited or overfished. The other important Lutjanidae, Lutjanus jocu and L. vivanus, are considered fully exploited, whereas L. analis and L. syanagris are moderately overfished. Landings of groupers show a decreasing trend over time with long-lived species being overfished, resulting in the targeting of smaller and shorter-lived groupers. The stocks of mackerel are under moderate levels of exploitation. There are no assessments of the status of the stock(s) of mangrove crabs. The decrease in landings of mangrove crabs in most northeastern states is understood as a sign of overfishing. Likewise, there are no assessments of the status of seabob shrimp stocks in the northeast, although the trend in landings indicates that the stock(s) are still moderately exploited with potential for supporting higher yields. Among the above-mentioned resources there are species considered in threat of extinction, such as the mutton snapper (L. analis) and the grouper (Mycteroperca tigris), and species considered overexploited or threatened by overexploitation. These resources account for about 24% of the total small-scale fisheries landings in 2002. 
The status of the resources accounting for the remaining 76% of the landings is unknown. An evaluation of the development stage of 253 small-scale fisheries stocks in the northeast concluded that 16% are in a development stage, 25% can be considered mature, 40% are in a senescent stage, 6% in recovery and 13% collapsed (Vasconcellos et al., 2007; Figure 4). Thus, about 47% of stocks could possibly sustain higher yields while 53% are probably overexploited and require more restrictive management measures if they are to be fished sustainably.
Exploitation status and relative importance to small-scale fisheries of previously assessed marine stocks in northeast Brazil. The relative importance of a species is expressed in tonnes and as a percentage of the species catches to the total small-scale fisheries landings in the region. Species are classified according to IN No. 5/2004, ‘I’ being species threatened by extinction and ‘II’ being species that are overexploited or threatened by overexploitation
Table 5 summarizes the available information about the status of small-scale fisheries resources exploited in southeast Brazil. As defined in Vasconcellos et al. (2007), the southeast encompasses the southeast and part of east biophysical regions defined in Figure 2. Sardine does not show signs of recovery since the collapse of the stock in the early 1990s. The stock of the broadband anchovy (Anchoviella lepindentostole) is under intense fishing pressure and the current level of exploitation is considered unsustainable. The stock of seabob shrimp presents clear signs of overexploitation with a continuous decrease in landings since the late 1980s. The three main demersal fish stocks, the white croaker, royal weakfish and weakfish, are either fully exploited or overexploited. The status of the grey triggerfish is unknown, but the recent increasing trend in landings and catch per unit effort (CPUE) indicates that the stock is probably not yet overfished. The anchovy (Engraulis anchoita) is a potential resource in the region, which is not commercially exploited yet. With the exception of the anchovies and the weakfish, all other species are listed in Annex II of IN No. 5/2004, and are considered overexploited or threatened by overexploitation. The species listed above account for 53% of the reported small-scale fisheries landings in 2002, with the grey triggerfish composing 36.1% of this total. The status of the remaining stocks responsible for 47% of small-scale fisheries production is unknown. The analysis of the development stage of 191 small-scale fisheries stocks in the southeast indicated that: 12% are in a development stage, 21% mature, 30% in a senescent stage, 7% recovering and 29% collapsed (Vasconcellos et al., 2007; Figure 4). Thus, approximately 60% of the stocks are probably overfished and unable to support higher yields in the future unless measures to reduce fishing pressure are applied.
Table 6 synthesizes the available information about the status of small-scale fisheries resources exploited in south Brazil. Fishing intensity directed to the stock of white croaker is considered unsustainable. Stock abundance has been continually decreasing and catches are expected to decrease in the near future. The stock of the longspine drum is also intensively exploited. The royal weakfish is overexploited and the current yield is about half of the estimated maximum sustainable yield. The pink shrimp was intensively exploited for many years by industrial and artisanal fisheries and shows signs of overexploitation; despite the high variability in catches, average landings have been decreasing since the 1980s. Similarly, the stock of seabob shrimp shows a decreasing trend in landings due to overexploitation. The status of the mullet stocks is unknown, but the decreasing trend in landings also suggests the species is at biologically unsustainable levels of exploitation. Stocks of long-lived species of importance to small-scale fisheries, such as the marine catfish, the black drum and the guitarfish, have collapsed. The current yield of these species is much lower than the historical peak in landings. The guitarfish is considered threatened by extinction (IN No. 5/2004) while practically all other species are considered overexploited or threatened by overexploitation. The anchovy appears as a potential stock not presently commercially harvested in south Brazil. South Brazil provides a better situation with respect to data availability; however, approximately half of the small-scale fisheries production comes from stocks with unknown status. An assessment of the development stage of 142 small-scale fisheries stocks exploited in the region indicated that: 22% are in a developing stage, 12% mature, 25% in a senescent stage, 8% recovering and 32% collapsed (Vasconcellos et al., 2007). That is, 58% of the stocks harvested by small-scale fisheries are probably being exploited at unsustainable levels, with more than half of them currently in a stage of collapse.
According to the analysis of fisheries development stages, the percentage of collapsed stocks increases from north to south, being 3% in the north, 12% in the northeast, 29% in the southeast, and 32% in the south. The available information indicates that small-scale fisheries seem to be less limited by resource scarcity in the north and northeast, where landings have been increasing in recent years (Vasconcellos et al., 2007) and a larger proportion of stocks are either in a stage of development, mature, or recovering from previous overfishing. Nonetheless, the real situation of the stocks in the north and northeast is more uncertain, particularly in the northeast, because of the lower quality of fisheries statistics and the overall predominance of small-scale fisheries in these regions. On the other hand, the southeast and south regions have been experiencing a marked decline in landings and present a higher percentage of fisheries in a senescent or collapsed stage. Consequently, there are no prospects of increasing production in these regions except through the application of more restrictive fishing measures (for both artisanal and industrial fisheries that share the resources), or through the development of fisheries directed to resources not yet commercially exploited, such as the anchovy.
Ecosystem models have been developed for the Abrolhos Bank (northeast), southeastern Brazilian Bight (southeast) and southern Brazil shelf ecosystem. These models are basically used as research tools and at this time have not been used as tools for supporting decision-making in fisheries management. Bio-economic models have been applied to industrial sardine and trawling fisheries in the southeastern Brazilian Bight and probably to other large stocks and fisheries (e.g. shrimps and lobsters). In general terms, it is not a common practice in fisheries management in Brazil to take into account uncertainties or to conduct any form of formal risk assessment when making decisions regarding fisheries regulation. Contents of regulations are the result of a number of influences, economic, political and scientific, but very often, and particularly with the phasing-out of GPEs, these influences are not transparent.
The management of fisheries in Brazil is mainly the responsibility of the federal government, which is responsible for assessing the status of the stocks and for setting and enforcing regulations on the use of aquatic living resources. Governmental institutional arrangements for regulating fisheries activities have been changing over the years. The role of the federal government in marine fisheries management became particularly influential in the mid-1960s with the creation of SUDEPE, an agency of the Ministry of Agriculture with sole responsibility for the development and management of fisheries. Later in 1989, fisheries became one of the agendas of IBAMA (Brazilian Institute of the Environment), a subsidiary of the Ministry of Environment. The shift of management responsibilities from SUDEPE to IBAMA was not favourable to artisanal fisheries. As IBAMA focuses its attention mostly on environmental issues, environmental legislation and law enforcement, there has been little attention given to the sustained development of artisanal fishing communities. In 1998, the government shifted a large part of the responsibilities of the fisheries sector from IBAMA to the Ministry of Agriculture, constituting the Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture (DPA). The main responsibility of DPA was to promote and execute programmes and projects to support the development of the industrial fisheries (its main objective was to promote the development of the sector and to manage unexploited fisheries resources). On the other hand, IBAMA was responsible for executing the national policies for the environment, and particularly for managing endangered and overexploited species, and encouraging the sharing and decentralization of decisions through co-management and community-based management initiatives. The development policies put forth by these two agencies were not only diverse but opposite and conflictive in their approach to resource management. According to Dias-Neto (1999) such a change represented “one of the most anarchical moments in fisheries management in Brazilian history”. Dias-Neto and Marrul-Filho (2003) highlighted the three main institutional conflicts created with the division of responsibilities between IBAMA and DPA. The first one was of a legal nature, related to the division of competencies in fisheries management, and in the organization and maintenance of the national system of control and licensing of fishing activities. The second one was conceptual, since stocks are intrinsically linked in the marine environment through ecological and/or technological interactions, and in multispecific fisheries the same fishing activity often targets stocks with different exploitation levels. Besides, a stock that is considered unexploited at a given moment could eventually be overfished and, hence, the same species could be under the responsibility of two different agencies at different moments in time. As stated by the authors “IBAMA and DPA were trying to divide the indivisible”. The third conflict was related to the transfer of responsibility from IBAMA to DPA for the management and control of foreign fleets fishing under joint-venture arrangement, and the consequent changes in the rules and norms.
