In 2003, the fisheries agency was created at ministerial level: the National Secretariat for Aquaculture and Fisheries (SEAP). SEAP has a broader authority than the previous agencies. Its priority is the development of the aquaculture sector, particularly of shrimp cultivation for export, freshwater aquaculture and industrial fisheries. In spite of official speeches, the artisanal sector is not a top priority for this new agency.
With the enactment of the Law 11.958 of June 2009, SEAP was transformed into the Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture (MPA). The same law put an end to the division of responsibilities in the management of fish stocks stated above making mandatory the joint work of MPA and IBAMA/Ministry of Environment in the design of rules and the governance for sustainable use of resources. This work is to be carried out under the general coordination of MPA. However this new institutional arrangement has not yet contributed to the implementation of policies and measures to revert the critical situation of the main fish stocks.
In terms of property rights, according to the Brazilian Constitution, the fisheries resources in the coastal zone and in the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) are considered common resources under a State property regime (MMA, 2002; Dias-Neto and Marrul-Filho, 2003). The Constitution also asserts that State and society should construct the means to collaborate and participate in the process of decision-making for the sustainable use of environmental resources and in the formulation of norms and rules to that effect (Dias-Neto and Marrul-Filho, 2003), which leaves ample scope for the sharing of responsibilities between government and society in the management of fisheries.
The weakening role of the State in fostering the development of artisanal fisheries during the last two decades, mainly after the termination of SUDEPE, contributed to the general lack of organization of the sector. On the other hand, the institutional void favoured action to social movements and NGOs in developing projects and management initiatives for the sustainable management of fisheries. Many of these initiatives were born out of a crisis that required solutions and from a process of increasing participation of fishers as new protagonists in decision-making. The initiatives were developed around five main processes that are currently legitimized, some of which are promoted by the government (all of them could be placed within a spectrum of co-management):
(a) Areas of Permanent Preservation (APA): defined as “large areas with a certain degree of human occupation and characterized by physical, biological, aesthetical or cultural elements of crucial importance for the quality of life and well-being of human populations, having as main goals to protect the biological diversity, to regulate the process of human occupation and to ensure the sustainable use of natural resources”. APAs are managed by a council constituted by representatives of governmental bodies, NGOs, community organizations, and the local population through specific management plans. Example in fisheries: ‘APA dos Corais’, Pernambuco, northeastern Brazil.
(b) Marine Extractive Reserve (MER): defined as “an area used by traditional extractive activity populations, whose livelihood is based on extractive activities but also complemented by subsistence agriculture and animal production, having as main goals to protect the livelihoods and culture of these populations and to ensure the sustainable use of natural resources”. MERs are managed by a deliberative council of organizations and community representatives through a specific management plan. At the time of writing this paper there were 13 MERs implemented or in process of implementation along the Brazilian coast (see section on Coastal Marine Protected Areas).
(c) Sustainable Development Reserves (SDR): defined as “areas used by traditional populations, whose existence is based on systems of sustainable exploitation of natural resources, developed through generations and adapted to the local ecological conditions, and that have played a key role in nature conservation and in the maintenance of biological diversity”. The objectives of the SDRs are “to preserve nature and at the same time to ensure the necessary conditions and means to sustain and improve the living conditions and the use of natural resources by traditional populations, as well as to appreciate and conserve the traditional knowledge-practice systems of environmental management of these populations”. SDRs are also managed by a deliberative council of organizations and communities representatives which is responsible for developing and implementing a management plan that defines, inter alia, no-take protected areas, buffer zones and corridors, and areas for sustainable use. The first and most well-known example is the Mamiraua SDR in the Amazon region.
(a) Fishing accords: regulated by Norm No. 29/03 of IBAMA, this instrument aims to define and legitimize access rules and norms elaborated by the fishing community to regulate the use of fisheries resources in a given region. This type of instrument does not involve the expropriation of land (like the conservation units above) but only some aspects regulating the exploitation of resources. There are examples of fishing accords in fisheries in the Amazon floodplain.
(b) Fishing forums: this is an instrument that is not regulated by the government but created as a result of communities’ initiatives to organize themselves, and to discuss their problems and seek solutions in partnership with governmental and non-governmental organizations. Since it is not regulated, this instrument can be developed in different ways, with various types of arrangements involving individual stakeholders and institutions. Some examples are the Forum of Patos Lagoon in southern Brazil, the Forum Agenda 21 in Ibiraquera, Santa Catarina, and the Forum Terramar in Ceará, among others.
The establishment of protected areas – of the various forms noted above – is one of the main government policies concerning coastal ecosystem conservation. The creation of protected areas is under the responsibility of Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation and the State’s Secretaries for the Environment. Presently, there are 28 protected areas, covering several coastal and marine ecosystems, such as coastal and oceanic islands/archipelagos, dunes, mangroves, lagoons and salt marsh habitats. The management of protected areas has been, in general, unsuccessful because of the lack of management plans, enforcement, and technical and financial means and research. The main reason, however, lies in the way these protected areas were established – without previous consultation with user groups, particularly traditional populations. According to existing legislation, these groups must be transferred from the places where protected areas are established. It is known, however, that in many areas, traditional communities have used these ecosystems with a low level of environmental impact, and they deserve to be important allies in the conservation process. Another reason for the failure of the protected areas management is that they were created mainly by federal and state agencies. Since local municipalities are excluded from the decision process, they provide very little support to these important conservation areas.
The Marine Extractive Reserve (MER), described earlier, is a relatively recent category of protected areas that reflects a new approach. Through MERs, marine areas are assigned to the exclusive use of a certain number of small-scale fishers. A management plan is agreed upon by a grassroots institution that assembles the fishers in the area of the reserve. Some six MERs have been officially established by the National Council of Traditional Populations (CNPT-IBAMA) and several others are in the process of being created, particularly in the north and northeast regions (Figure 5).
MERs offer a way to control the highly destructive, still basically unmanaged, development of the coastal zone, while at the same time reinforcing the resource-use rights and territorial claims of local communities to the micro-environments of small-scale fishing. MERs are essentially an effort to modify and extend the concept of ‘extractive reserves’ – a conservation and sustainable development framework successfully instituted in western Amazonian forest economies (primarily rubber-tapper) to coastal aquatic and marine domains of traditional fishing communities (CNPT*; Cunha, 1992; Diegues, 1999, 2001). By taking into account how both environment and society benefit from helping coastal communities secure continuing access to their traditional sea territories and livelihood resources, the MER is a radical departure from conventional approaches to setting up and managing marine protected areas. In the past, most marine protected areas (MPAs) were established opportunistically or, more recently, almost solely on the basis of biodiversity criteria.
The MER initiative is exceptionally promising; it has the potential to unify and reconcile elements that all too often are seen as incompatible: traditional culture heritage and cultural resource preservation needs, sustainable local fisheries, and conservation of marine biological diversity. Various provisions of national environmental legislation (namely Law No. 9.985 instituting SNUC; Decree IBAMA No. 22 / 2-10-92), civil codes, and international treaties to which Brazil is a signatory (e.g. Articles 8j, 10c, 10d of the Convention on Biological Diversity) endorse the principles on which collectively held marine extractive reserves are based. However, it remains to be seen whether protected areas can be implemented and effectively managed on a scale broad enough to have biologically significant impacts, as well as questions concerning their social feasibility and economic viability.
To successfully institute a network of MER sites, CNPT also faces a major challenge in dealing with federal, state and municipal jurisdictional conflicts, inconsistent policies and legislation across sectors, and the need for greater institutional coordination and cooperation in managing marine and aquatic resources within the environment sector as a whole (Cordell, 2002).
