The “Cadastro Nacional de Instituições Ambientalistas – Ecolista”, a roster published by the Worldwide Fund for Nature/Mater Natura, indicated that there were 1 400 Environmental NGOs registered in 2000, from which 296 were created in 1991–1992. Around 60 of them (14.7%) deal exclusively with coastal/marine ecosystems. If the 504 environmental NGOs dealing with the Atlantic Forest are added, one could say that roughly 61% of Brazilian environmental NGOs are, in one way or another, concerned with the conservation of the various coastal ecosystems. A large proportion of the environmental NGOs are located in the northeast (30%). Within the environmental NGOs dealing exclusively with coastal/marine ecosystems, there are some which address species or ecosystems conservation, such as SOS Mata Atlântica, Tamar (sea turtles), Peixe-Boi (manatee), Baleia Jubarte (humpback whales), and the Clube de Observadores de Aves (seabirds in Rio Grande do Norte). There are also socially oriented environmental NGOs, which deal specifically with traditional populations and their environments, such as Terramar, Sociedade Civil Mamirauá, Sociedade Civil São Sebastião Tem Alma, and Fundação Josué de Castro.
At the societal level, socially oriented environmentalism gained importance vis-a-vis the traditional environmentalism which was focused mainly on protection of species. This new environmentalism was able to establish alliances with other social movements, political parties and local movements.
(b) The increasing number of public institutions dealing with environment conservation. By the end of the military regime, there was space for public discussion and movements concerning environmental issues. Secretariats for Environment were established in many Brazilian states. At the federal level, the National Secretariat for the Environment (SEMA) created in 1973 and the Ministry of the Environment (created in 1992) have been designated as core agencies for environmental protection.
(c) The importance of the environment was also highlighted by a growing number of universities and government research centres dealing with coastal zones and marine ecosystems. Well-known oceanographic institutions, such as the Oceanographic Institute at the University of São Paulo, the Oceanography Department at the Federal University of Rio Grande in Rio Grande do Sul, Labomar in Ceará, Labohidro in Maranhão, and the Schools of Fisheries Engineering in Pernambuco and Ceará have contributed to increased knowledge of coastal/marine ecosystems in the northeast. Some other research institutions linked to universities, such as Nupaub-Research Center on Human Populations and Wetlands at the University of São Paulo, have also contributed to increasing the knowledge about the relationship between local communities and coastal ecosystems.
The role of the State, of non-governmental organizations, and local institutions in coastal managementCoastal conservation and management became an important issue in Brazil in the late 1970s and in the 1980s when the impacts of industrialization and urbanization resulted in a rapid degradation of the coastal environment.
Artisanal fishers started a movement in the northeast against the pollution of estuaries and rivers caused by the acidic waste of the alcohol-producing distilleries. It was the starting point for a stronger organization of small-scale fishers, supported by the Catholic Church and some non-governmental organizations. This social process indicated the emergence of new identities and social awareness among coastal communities and artisanal fishing communities. These identity-building processes often occurred during conflicts that saw these communities opposed to urban expansion that often resulted in the eviction of artisanal fishers from their beaches and adjacent coastal waters. In tropical countries, where warm, sandy, sunny beaches became valuable assets to national and international tourism, artisanal fishers and their activities are seen as obstacles to a free development of market forces. Artisanal fishers and local dwellers are resettled into the corner of their own beaches, which are transformed into tourist resorts. In some other cases, the establishment of large industrialization projects resulted in high levels of marine pollution, destruction of valuable habitats, such as mangroves, and ultimately led to the social disruption of artisanal fishing communities. In many cases, the social reaction against these processes led to the establishment of new and politically orientated social movements, such as the National Movement of Fishers (MONAPE).
In the late 1970s, government institutions were created at the federal, state and municipal level to deal with environmental conservation. The first federal institution was SEMA, created in 1973 and incorporated by the Ministry of the Environment, and Legal Amazon, created in 1992. In 1989, IBAMA was created and incorporated into the Ministry of Environment. In 1981, the first comprehensive national law on the environment was promulgated. The National Council on the Environment (CONAMA), which is responsible for the main policies concerning the environment, was created with the participation of governmental agencies and NGOs. In 1986, CONAMA approved the first legislation requiring environmental impact analysis for large projects. In 1988, the Brazilian Constitution declared the Atlantic Forest and its coastal zone as one of five crucial areas for management and sustainable development. Brazilian governmental and non-governmental organizations have actively participated in the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development–1992 (UNCED) during the various discussions about coastal/marine environmental issues that produced Chapter 17 of Agenda 21. Also, environmental NGOs such as the National Forum and MONAPE have participated in drawing up a Fisheries Treaty, signed by non-governmental organizations during UNCED 1992. Brazil signed the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) in November 1982 and ratified it in December 1988. In January 1993, the Brazilian Congress decreed Law 8.617, on which Brazil defines the 12-mile territorial sea and the 200-mile economic exclusive zone (EEZ). Among other important international guidelines, agreements and treaties ratified by Brazil that deal with coastal/marine conservation and fisheries are the Convention on Biological Diversity, the 1995 United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement and the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries.
Information on artisanal fisheries is generally scarce, and the fisheries production statistics present many limitations. The institution with legal responsibility to collect and disseminate fisheries statistics is IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics), but in 1990 IBGE’s system of collection was interrupted. Since 1995, IBAMA started compiling and disseminating the data collected by different institutions in different states. Some projects include: ESTATPESCA developed by IBAMA’s Center of Fisheries Research and Management for the Northeast Coast (CEPENE) for the northeastern states and by IBAMA’s Center of Fisheries Research and Management for the North Coast (CEPENOR) for Pará; the system of control of landings developed by São Paulo’s Instituto de Pesca, Univali, IBAMA’s Center of Fisheries Research and Management for the South Coast (CEPSUL); and IBAMA’s Center of Fisheries Research and Management of Estuarine and Lagoon Fisheries (CEPERG) in southeastern and southern Brazil. However, the lack of a standardization of methodologies used in the collection of statistics is a factor that precludes the comparative assessment of fisheries production among states. One particular problem with the landings statistics in some states is the lack of a more precise classification of fisheries production by artisanal fishery types, with a tendency to aggregate all artisanal fisheries production in a single category of boats with less than 20 tonnes of gross tonnage. One exception is the system of data collection of the project ESTATPESCA, which provides more detailed information about artisanal fishery production in the northeastern states. Another important limitation of landings statistics is the large volume of catches that are not precisely identified. Landed fish is often classified according to the commercial or common names, which do not allow the precise identification of the species. This problem occurs due to a combination of factors: the difficulty in monitoring of fishing in areas of high biodiversity and the preferential allocation of human and financial resources to the monitoring of large stocks targeted by industrial fisheries, among other causes. Illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing is also recognized as a problem that erodes the quality of fisheries catch statistics and leads to an underestimation of fisheries production (Isaac et al., 2006b; Peres et al., in press; Vasconcellos et al., in press).
Information on biological and ecological aspects of coastal fisheries resources is not routinely collected by official agencies. Instead, it is produced by research projects conducted by universities and research institutes. The same also applies to socio-economic data. Among the research institutions that routinely carry out studies about fisheries in coastal areas are: the Oceanographic Institute of the University of São Paulo, Oceanography Department of the Federal University of Rio Grande, Univali in Santa Catarina, the Federal Universities of Paraná, Espírito Santo, Bahia, Pernambuco, Rio Grande do Norte and Pará, the Fisheries Institute of São Paulo, Labomar in Ceará, Labohidro in Maranhão, and the Schools of Fisheries Engineering in Pernambuco and Ceará. Some other research institutions linked to universities, such as NUPAUB-Research Center on Human Populations and Wetlands of the University of São Paulo, and Nepan-Research Center on Environmental Research of the University of Campinas, have also cooperated in increasing the knowledge about the relationships between local communities and coastal ecosystems. There are also some research network initiatives in the country that aim to improve the knowledge of coastal processes, fisheries and management through collaboration among research institutes. It is worth mentioning the programme Renewable Resources of the EEZ (REVIZEE) conducted by a consortium of universities and research agencies to improve knowledge about the oceanography and ecology of fisheries resources in the Brazilian EEZ. The Coastal Resources of the Millennium Institute (a consortium of universities funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology) is collecting ecological and socio-economic data on coastal fisheries of seven states.
In order to coordinate the various governmental research projects on marine resources, the Interministerial Commission for Marine Resources (CIRM) was created in 1974. CIRM’s main responsibilities are the promotion of research and the rational management of marine resources. The Commission was formed by representatives of eight ministries (Navy, Foreign Relations, Agriculture, Transport, Education, Industry and Commerce, Mines and Energy, and Interior) and the Planning Office and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development. In 1979, a Secretariat was established (SECIRM) and was chaired by the Navy. Since 1988, CIRM has implemented various research projects concerning the marine environment, including the Project Leplac, which aimed to collect geophysical data to define the limits of the Brazilian EEZ and the REVIZEE programme, an effort to assess the potential of marine resources according to the framework established by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). In this process, CIRM has established research agreements with the main oceanographic institutes to collect and evaluate the information.
During most of the 1990s, IBAMA maintained technical working groups on the main industrial fishery resources (lobsters, shrimps, demersal fish, sardine, snappers, tunas and catfish). In general, there is more information for these resources and fisheries than for any other coastal fishery in the country.
Historically, artisanal fishers in Brazil have been labelled as inefficient and unproductive and, consequently, considered as objects of social welfare programmes. The available information about the sector demystifies this approach by showing, for instance, that the artisanal fishery is as productive as the industrial fishery in terms of total landings’ volume. Therefore, the artisanal fishery deserves at least the same level of attention for development policies as received by the industrial fishery sector. In fact, it has been argued that the artisanal fishery is more economically viable and more socially desirable, especially for the exploitation of coastal ecosystems. This is justified by a number of factors, such as the nature of the fishery resources available in coastal tropical areas (multispecies and small-stock sizes), the spatial dispersion of fishing communities, the ample utilization of materials locally available, the direct supply of fish to local/regional markets, and the reduced use of fossil fuels.
With a few exceptions, the development of fisheries in Brazil has followed an unsustainable path for resource exploitation in the different coastal regions. The causes behind the failures in maintaining resources at biologically sustainable levels must be properly identified to support the development of policies for the sector. In this sense, particular attention must be given to the analysis of the interactions and interferences among the artisanal and industrial sectors. It is not by coincidence that the situation of stocks is more critical in the areas where resources are shared between industrial and artisanal fisheries. For instance, in the south and southeast, the industrial trawling fishery has been pointed out as one of the main culprits of the overfishing of traditional demersal stocks, because of intense direct harvest of the stocks, and also due to the bycatch and discards of juveniles. Similarly, the rapid development of the industrial purse seine fishery for sardine in the southeast was one of the main reasons behind the collapse of the stock. Nonetheless, there should also be analysis of the artisanal fishery factors that contributed to each of the fishery collapses.
As artisanal fisheries have been decreasing in importance in the south and southeast and maintaining their predominance in the north and northeast, it is clear that the strategies for development, management and assessment of fisheries must be different among these regions. Although conservation policies are important for all regions, they are particularly required in the south-southeast, due to the depletion of traditional resources and the decrease in resource availability to artisanal fishers. Strategies of resource conservation and rebuilding (decrease in effort, protected areas, etc.) must be balanced by incentives and strategies to increase fishery profits through the exploitation of alternative resources, the development of alternative economic livelihoods and other strategies. In fact, the participation of fishers in small-scale, family-based aquaculture has been increasing in recent years in these regions. The feasibility and potential of aquaculture as an alternative to a fishing livelihood is case-specific and needs to be further explored.In the north and northeast, where the abundance of resources is not yet a limiting factor for the maintenance of the artisanal fishery, management actions must also deal with the recovery of stocks that are in trouble, but should aim particularly to: establish institutional arrangements and strategies to prevent the increase in fishing capacity to a level beyond the productive capacity of the coastal resources and ecosystems; minimize and mitigate impacts of other coastal activities on fisheries; and provide secure access rights to small-scale fishers that have been threatened or displaced by unplanned coastal development.
There is not only a great diversity of habitats and species used by artisanal coastal fisheries, but also a variety of cultures of which fishers are part, with distinct livelihoods and knowledge of resources, the environment, and traditional forms of resource use accumulated through generations along the Brazilian coast. This paper is an attempt to illustrate this diversity and hence to serve as a reference on the bio-physical, socio-economic and cultural context in which fishers are placed in each region.