Coastal fisheries have been receiving an increasing level of attention from governmental and academic institutions in Brazil in recent years. The reasons for this are many, but the most important are: the general failure of governmental policies for the development of the fisheries sector, which have been focused almost exclusively on industrial fisheries; the growing recognition of the importance of artisanal fishers who, without support from the government, continue to supply local and regional markets; the innumerable pressures that artisanal fishing communities have been suffering, owing to the expansion of the interests of the real-estate and tourism sectors and environmental degradation – factors that often force the fishers to move to cities, having lost their land; the coverage given to these conflicts by the press; the recent political liberalization in Brazil after the military regime (1964 to 1984), which allowed the marginalized and forgotten groups of society to express themselves more freely, especially in defence of their rights and aspirations in the Constituent National Assembly; the work carried out by non-governmental organizations, in particular, the Catholic Church, through the activities of the Fisheries’ Pastoral mainly in the north and northeastern states; and the birth of the National Movement of Fishers (MONAPE) in 1989.
The development of artisanal fisheries faces many challenges due to the lack of policies, strategies and concrete experiences that can support sustainable fisheries production, better organization and improvement of the livelihood of fishing communities. There has been a continuous worsening of the problems affecting the production of artisanal fisheries owing to the depletion of fisheries resources, environmental degradation of coastal areas, and ultimately to the ineffectiveness of governmental strategies in overcoming the obstacles that impede the sustained development of the artisanal fishing communities along the Brazilian coast. The overall lack of information about these fisheries is a subsidiary problem that gives low political visibility to the sector and thus helps perpetuate its status. This chapter aims to provide a broad perspective of the status of artisanal coastal fisheries in Brazil, and to put forward some alternative strategies for the development of the sector. In describing these types of fisheries, we opted to concentrate as much as possible on general regional characteristics, but also highlight special features of relevance to particular fisheries when necessary.
Artisanal fishers are organized into a number of fishing communities settled along the coast and in small coastal towns in Brazil. Artisanal fishing is conducted in a variety of coastal ecosystems. The characteristics of habitats, fauna, productivity and oceanography of these ecosystems greatly influence the way fishing activities are developed. On a broad scale, the Brazilian coastline can be divided into five large ecosystems with distinct environmental characteristics of importance to capture fisheries (Matssura, 1995; Figure 1).
Biological production is high in the north, as a result of the continental runoff from the Amazon River (Teixeira and Tundisi, 1967). The wide continental shelf and the rich benthic community favoured the development of industrial trawling activities in this region, mostly for shrimps and large catfishes. The northeast and east regions present oligotrophic conditions due to the influence of tropical waters from the Brazil Current. Rocky bottoms and a mostly narrow continental shelf induced the development of hook-and-line and longline fisheries for rockfishes, sharks and tunas. In the southeast, primary production is mainly driven by seasonal upwelling of nutrient-rich, cold subtropical waters pumped by alongshore winds and by cyclonic vortexes originating from the Brazil Current (Bakun and Parrish, 1990; Matsuura, 1995). The southern part of the Brazilian coast is under the influence of the Subtropical Convergence between the southward and northward Brazil and Falkland Islands/Islas Malvinas currents. The confluence of water masses and the high volume of continental runoff provide physical and chemical conditions for high biological production on the shelf (Seeliger et al., 1997). Trawling is the main type of fishing activity in the southeastern and southern regions, although the presence of highly abundant pelagic stocks, mainly sardine, in the southeast has also led to the development of an important purse seine fishery since 1950.
Within each of these major ecosystems, there is a variety of inshore and coastal ecosystems where diverse communities of artisanal fishers live and work. Coral reefs, mangroves, estuaries and coastal lagoons are particularly important coastal ecosystems. Coral reefs occur along 3 000 km of the northeast and east coasts and off oceanic islands. Mangroves extend almost along the entire coast of Brazil, from Oiapoque (Amapá) to Laguna (Santa Catarina), occupying an area of about 25 000 km2. The most extensive areas of mangrove are associated with the mouth of the Amazon River in the north of Brazil. Coastal lagoons are found in the southern, southeastern and northeastern regions, and are especially important in the states of Alagoas, Rio de Janeiro, Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul. The Patos lagoon, located in Rio Grande do Sul, southern Brazil, is recognized as one of the most important centres for artisanal fisheries in Brazil.
Two main fish production systems co-exist in Brazil: industrial and artisanal fisheries. Industrial fisheries are defined as fish harvesting undertaken by large boats that belong to a fishing company. Social and technical division of labour is high, and production is sold to processing companies and large markets. Industrial fisheries concentrate their harvesting on high market value species such as lobster, shrimp and tuna, or highly abundant stocks such as sardine.
There is a continuing debate on the definition of the term ‘artisanal fisheries’. The Superintendence for the Development of Fisheries (SUDEPE, which was the governmental agency for fisheries development from 1967 to 1988) defined the artisanal fishery as the fishery carried out by boats with less than 20 tonnes of capacity. This definition is clearly unsatisfactory considering that some industrial fishing boats also fall into this category. As a result, statistics on the production of artisanal fisheries are not accurate.
In this study coastal artisanal fishers are defined as independent fish harvesters whose livelihood is based on fishing, on a part or full-time basis, using labour and knowledge-intensive fishing techniques, and employing family or community labour, often on a sharing basis, for harvesting in coastal habitats. The fish caught are normally sold in the local market, usually through middlemen, although some is for home consumption. The artisanal fisheries sector has a longstanding tradition in Brazil. Before the governmental incentives to develop industrial fisheries in 1967, artisanal fisheries accounted for more than 80% of the fish production in the country. Today it is responsible for approximately 54% of the total marine landings of about 516 000 tonnes (Figure 2).
The available information on the artisanal coastal fisheries operating in each region along the coast is summarized in Table 1. Fishing activities in the north, northeast and east coasts of Brazil are predominantly small-scale – the sector accounts for more than 90% of total landings in these regions. Industrial fisheries account for most of the fisheries production, with artisanal fisheries representing 34% and 8% of the total landings in the southeast and south, respectively, in recent years.
In the north, artisanal fisheries are concentrated in the estuary of the Amazon River, other smaller estuaries, bays and shallow coastal waters and in the extensive mangrove areas that cover the coast. Coastal fishers use small- (<8 m) to medium-sized (8–14 m) wooden boats and employ various types of gillnets, longlines and fish weirs to catch catfish, weakfish, mullets, sharks and mackerel, among other species of fish. Gillnets and hook-and-line are used for hard bottom species such as groupers and snappers as well as mackerel on offshore reefs and banks. Trawling is also used to catch shrimp in coastal areas. The capture of freshwater species is common during the rainy season when the shelf is strongly influenced by the runoff from the Amazon River. The fisheries inside the estuary use small boats and canoes, with rows, sail or small engines, and employ gillnets, hook-and-line and fish weirs to catch catfish, mullets, weakfish and freshwater species. In the mangrove areas, the main activity is the manual collection of crabs (Ucides cordatus).
Artisanal fisheries in the northeast are based on small- to medium-sized boats (most of them <12 m long) using sail or small engines, canoes using oars or sail, and sail rafts. There is a large diversity of species and fishing gear/methods used in coastal fisheries in the northeast. Lessa et al. (2004) identified, for instance, at least 16 types of gear used by small-scale fishers in Pernambuco, one of the states of the northeast region. In general, gillnets, longlines and hook-and-line are used in coastal and offshore waters to catch snappers, groupers, mackerel, sardines, pompanos, tunas and dolphinfish. Lobsters are captured mostly with gillnets (caçoeiras) and by diving. Shrimp trawling is conducted in certain areas close to the mouth of estuaries. Gillnets, trammel nets, cast nets, manual trawling and traps are employed closer to shore and inside estuaries and coastal lagoons to capture anchovies, mullets, needle-fish, and shrimps, among other species. The manual collection of crabs and molluscs in mangrove areas is particularly important throughout the region.