On the east coast, particularly in the state of Espirito Santo, Martins and Doxsey (2006) identified the following types of fisheries of small- and medium-size scale: an offshore hook-and-line and longline fishery, based on boats of 8 to 15 m long with engines, targeting reef associated and pelagic species; a hook-and-line fishery, based on boats of 6 to 8 m long with engines, targeting specifically the triggerfish (Balistes capriscus); a coastal fishery with hook-and-line and gillnets, based on small boats with oars, catching mostly Sciaenidae fish; a fishery targeting tunas and other large pelagics around oil drilling platforms based on well-equipped, medium-sized boats; shrimp fisheries based on trawling boats of 7 to 10 m long; and lobster fisheries based on small boats, using oars or small engines, and employing gillnets and diving. Mangrove areas in estuaries are also important for the manual collection of crabs.
In the state of Rio de Janeiro, on the southeast coast, the most important artisanal fisheries utilize gear such as hook-and-line, gillnet, beach seine, shrimp trawls and manual collection of shell/crab. One of the most traditional activities is the beach seine fishery based on large canoes and seine nets to encircle migrating schools of bluefish, mullets and bonitos (Silva, 2002). Shrimp are caught in the coastal lagoons using fixed nets, manual trawling and cast nets. Small purse seiners also participate in the sardine fishery in coastal waters. In the state of São Paulo, one of the most important and traditional fisheries is the engraulid Anchoviella lepidendostole fishery. This fishery occurs mainly in estuaries and is carried out with wooden canoes, 4 to 5 m long, using oars or small engines, and employs trawling nets and other types of gear (Gasalla and Tomas, 1998). In the state of Paraná, fishing activities are predominantly small-scale (Andriguetto-Filho et al., 2006). Important fishing activities in the region are the trawl fishery for marine shrimp along the coast and in estuaries, the gillnet fishery for sharks and demersal fishes (mostly Sciaenidae), and the estuarine fisheries for juvenile shrimp, engraulids and mullets. The manual collection of crabs and molluscs is also significant. Further south, in the state of Santa Catarina, beach seining for coastal fishes, estuarine fisheries for shrimps with fixed nets and trawling, gillnet fisheries for croaker, weakfish and flatfish, and jigging (zangarilho) for squid are important artisanal fishing activities (Sunye and Morison, 2006). 
Finally, in southern Brazil, artisanal fisheries operate mostly in coastal lagoons, estuaries and shallow coastal waters using wooden boats, most of them less than 10 m long and under 20 gross tonnes. The main artisanal fishing activities are the gillnet fisheries for croaker, mullets and flatfish, and the fishery for shrimps with fixed nets and trawling (D’Incao, 1991; Reis et al., 1994; Kalikoski et al., 2002). A medium-scale commercial fishery operates in coastal waters (Reis et al., 1994). The fleet is composed of wooden boats, 12 to 15 m long, with more powerful engines, and targets demersal fishes (mostly Sciaenidae) and also pelagic species such as the bluefish (Pomatomus saltatrix) using gillnets and hook-and-line.
Fishing and mollusc harvesting were important activities for indigenous people before the arrival of the Portuguese colonisers in the sixteenth century. In several areas of the coast there are shell middens (sambaquis), demonstrating that indigenous people fed on molluscs and fish for several centuries. Jean de Léry, a French Calvinist who visited Brazil in early 1500, described fishing techniques used by coastal Indians, such as bone hooks and small nets made of fibres found in the forests as well as canoes and rafts (jangadas) made of floating logs. Fishing was also important along the Amazonian rivers and Indians used fish as their basic source of protein.
Until the end of slavery in 1888, fishing activities in the northeast were undertaken mainly by African slaves. Small farmers also used part of their time for fishing along the coast. Coastal fish species, such as mullet, were the basis for protein consumption in coastal farms, towns and villages. The social upper classes, however, imported salted cod from Portugal (Silva, 1997a).
A variety of human cultures based on fisheries are found along the coast. In the south region, between Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catarina, live the descendants of the Azoreans and Portuguese that settled in the region in the seventeenth century. The first European generations were both peasants and fishers, but since the late 1940s they have concentrated mainly on fishing. The caiçaras, who live between Paraná and the state of Rio de Janeiro, are descendants of the Indians, Portuguese colonizers and African slaves. They practice small-scale agriculture associated with artisanal fishing. The jangadeiros (raft-fishers) live in the northeast coast, from Bahia to Fortaleza, and they depend almost exclusively on artisanal fishing, using the jangada (a raft with sails) that is very suitable for the type of sea, wind and sandy coast of the area.
The cultural background and the environmental setting favoured the development of different relationships with the sea. Small farmer-fishers combined fishing with agricultural activities in the provinces of São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. In the northeast region, coastal communities have developed a long tradition of coastal fishing, separated from agriculture. Cultural factors, as well as the shape of the continental shelf, could be responsible for the different relationships between agricultural and fishing activities. The continental shelf is narrower in the northeast than in the southeast, and thus most of the fish species in the northeast live in rocky habitats further from the coast. These factors require fishers with good navigational skills and fishing knowledge. The sandy coast in the northeast also inhibited intensive agricultural activities and therefore the artisanal fishers in this area have a strong tradition of dealing with the open sea. Most of the fishing activity in this area was carried out within a system involving a petty mode of production, where some of the harvested fish was used for subsistence and some as a commodity.
Coastal legislation has contributed to (but also interfered negatively with) the development of traditional sea tenure. Since the middle of the last century a stretch of 33 m of land measured from the 1833 highest tide belongs to the State (called Terras de Marinha). This area cannot be privately owned and no permanent construction can be made in this area without State permission. Small-scale fishers, although they have no legal entitlement, occupy these areas. They have customary rights of occupancy (posse) to live in those areas, where they build their thatched roof houses. The same right (posse) is transferred to the nearby coastal waters when they occupy a place in the estuaries and lagoons to build their fish weirs (cercos).
The State, through the Navy, also tried to control artisanal fishers through forced services. As a result, rebellions occurred in 1903 in Rio de Janeiro and Ceará. To control these rebellions, in 1921 the Brazilian Navy created the first fishers guilds (Colônias de Pescadores). According to the guild regulations, all fishers should be registered in order to receive permission to fish. In practice, each coastal municipality had its own guild that regulated the lives of fishers. However, with the promulgation of the new Brazilian Constitution in 1988, fishers were given rights to organize their own free associations.
Commercial fishing began to develop more intensively beginning in the twentieth century, particularly in the southern states, where the Portuguese and Spanish migrants started to use larger boats for fishing sardine, which was also used for canning. Industrial fishing further developed after the 1960s with the support of a large fisheries development programme undertaken by SUDEPE. Before then, most of the fishing was done by artisanal fishers along the coast and rivers.
It is extremely difficult to calculate the number of artisanal fishers, considering that the ‘official’ criteria based on boat size is not accurate. According to data from the 2000 census, there are about 248 000 fishers on the coast organized into fishers’ guilds. The northeast has approximately 62% of the total number of guilds, followed by the southeast with 16%, south with 12% and the north with 10% (data provided by the Confederation of Fishers, 1986). Also, according to the Confederation there are approximately 288 500 fishers who are not affiliated with the guilds. Thus, there are approximately 536 000 artisanal coastal fishers in Brazil.
Data obtained from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) in the 1970s indicated that around 70% of artisanal fishers lived in coastal/rural areas and 30% resided in urban areas. In the north and in the northeast, fishers lived mainly in rural communities, while in the southeastern and southern regions they were mainly urban dwellers. Considering that since the 1970s, rural-urban emigration (which in Brazil is also synonymous with emigration from the interior to the coast) has been a widespread phenomenon, one can acknowledge that the degree of urbanization of artisanal fishers is much higher now.