The network of fish trade in artisanal fishing villages is complex, often involving middlemen on several levels, from the beach to the neighbouring cities and the central markets in state capitals. In the Amazonian region, for instance, artisanal fishers (especially those who live far from the cities) are totally dependent on the middlemen. In Pará the fish bought by the geleiro is resold to the ‘weigher’, who in turn sells it to the ‘retailer’ and from there it is sold in the ‘retail market’. Since the 1970s, due to the roadways network development, the traders in the cities, as well as the fishing companies, send their trucks to the beaches to purchase fish from artisanal fishers. The fishing companies pay for the fuel of the motorized artisanal boats in exchange for the exclusive rights to purchase the catch.
Artisanal fishers are organized into fishing guilds (colônias de pesca), similar to the Iberian guilds, created originally by the Brazilian Navy. The objective for the creation of these guilds was to organize the fishing communities spread out along the coast into reserves for the Navy. The directors of the colônias are elected by fishers, who are legal members of the colônias, and the directors in turn elect the president of the Provincial Federation. The president of the National Confederation was personally nominated by the agriculture minister, to which the fishing sector was institutionally attached until 1989.
Before the 1988 Constitution, a majority of the directors of the colônias were representatives of other social and professional sectors, such as fish traders and lawyers, who utilized the fishers’ organizations for political purposes. In 1973, a new statute was established for the colônias, but no substantial changes occurred as this new law was promulgated during the military regime and there was no consultation whatsoever with the fishers. In the beginning of the 1980s, for the first time artisanal fishers of Pernambuco (northeast) organized mass meetings against the environmental degradation of the rivers and estuaries caused by the large sugar-cane mills. The movement to redemocratize the country towards the end of the military dictatorial regime had an important influence on the democratization of the overall electoral process. This process was stronger in the northeast, where the Pastoral dos Pescadores (Fishers’ Pastoral) created by the National Conference of Bishops of Brazil played an important role. After 1986, the artisanal fishers created the Movimento pela Constituinte da Pesca, which enabled artisanal fishers to express their demands in the National Congress for the first time: free and democratic association, end to fiscal incentives for industrial fishing, labour rights, recognition of women’s work, development programmes, and control of environmental degradation, among other demands.
In 1989, with the declaration of the Constitution, the movement phased out, but MONAPE became operational. The main challenge for MONAPE is the stimulation of an independent and democratic organization of artisanal fishers, seeking to maintain the rights earned by the 1988 Constitution and to fight for new social and labour rights. The MONAPE has organized various national meetings of its members, also inviting representatives from organizations of fish workers from neighbouring countries like the Confederación Nacional de Pescadores Artesanales de Chile (CONAPACH). MONAPE is active only in the northern regions where it is based, as well as in some states of the northeast. Unfortunately, MONAPE has not succeeded in establishing itself as a national movement capable of offering alternatives to the existing institutional framework that is marked by protectionism and the lack of clear and effective policies favouring artisanal fishing, as mentioned before.
Before the Constitution of 1988, fishers were only allowed to organize themselves into traditional colônias whose role was mainly related to social services. The new Constitution allowed fishers to create their own trade unions; however, few of these unions were established effectively. In the 1980s the Pastoral da Pesca, which is linked to the Catholic Church, began working to secure the rights of other workers (i.e. retirement benefits) to artisanal fishers. Today, fishers have the right to inscribe themselves as autonomous workers in the National Institute of Social Security, and pay a contribution until retirement (60 years for men and 55 years for women). According to the Organic Law of Social Security, they can apply for retirement on grounds of health problems, health benefits and maternity allowances. In the regions in which fishing closures are used as management strategies, fishers that are associated to the colônias and have a licence from the Ministry of Agriculture receive an allowance (unemployment benefit) to compensate for the period without fishing.
While the traditional use of the coastal ecosystems by artisanal fisheries has had little impact on coastal resources, the latest utilization of coastal ecosystems by urban-industrial activities has intensified the degradation of these environments considerably. The degradation and contamination of coastal areas has caused significant negative consequences to the productivity of the sector and the quality of life in fishing communities.
The most important ecosystem along the coast is the Atlantic Forest that covered around 1 million km2 at the beginning of the Portuguese settlement. This forest reaches the coastline in many parts of the country; thus mangroves can be considered part of this large forest. The Atlantic Forest has a biological diversity as high as the Amazon Forest, with a large number of endemic species. The forest has been destroyed even more intensively since the increase of the urban-industrial development in the 1960s. Only around 5 to 10% of this large, forested biome still exists today, and it is mainly located along the coasts of southern Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and Paraná States. The Atlantic Forest is also home to different human cultures, such as Indians and their descendants, the caiçaras and jangadeiros, that have developed a deep knowledge of, and traditional management system for, the forest and their adjacent coastal ecosystems.
During the colonial period, the coastal zones were used as trade centres and as the gateway to enter the hinterland, where mineral and agricultural resources were abundant. Major cities were usually located on the coast, thus ensuring communication with the colonial power overseas as well as the hinterland. Marine resources, with the exception of whale hunting, were also exploited at a subsistence level. During that period, boat construction was one of the few important industries on shore and was responsible for intensive woodcutting in some northeastern provinces. After independence, and particularly during the second half of the nineteenth century, most of the important economic activities, such as coffee, rubber and sugar-cane plantations, shifted from the coastal zone to the hinterland. At the beginning of the twentieth century, industrialization led to a shift from producing goods for the internal market to importing and exporting products. Small industrial plants for processing cotton and food products were concentrated both in the hinterland and on the coast.
After the 1950s, Brazil pursued an industrial economic model oriented towards export. Most of the large heavy industries (chemical, petrochemical, fertilizer) were and still are located in estuaries and bays, as well as next to other fragile coastal ecosystems: in São Luís Island (for aluminium processing) in the northern State of Maranhão; in the coastal lagoons of Maceió, (Alagoas), in Salvador Bay, in the Vitória Island (for iron export), Rio de Janeiro bay, Santos-Cubatão, in São Paulo, and in the Patos lagoon in Rio Grande do Sul. Huge harbours for export of mining production were established in São Luís (Maranhão) and Vitória (Espírito Santo). Examples of these large industries settled on the coast are: chemical industries in Arraial do Cabo (Rio de Janeiro) in Aratu and Camaçari in Salvador (Bahia); oil and chemical industries in Cubatão (São Paulo); Dow Chemical, Petrobrás and Petroflex in Rio de Janeiro; Salgema in Maceió (Alagoas); fertilizer production in many cities around the coast; coal mining near the coast of Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul; and iron production in Cubatão (São Paulo) and in Vitória (Espírito Santo). Paper pulp production, involving large areas of eucalyptus plantations, is important along the coast of Espírito Santo and southern Bahia. Many alcohol distilleries have been established along the coast, particularly in the northeast. As a result, pollution has been heavily concentrated in this zone and coastal degradation has been extensive (Figure 3).
Increasing urbanization has a major impact on coastal areas, since five of the nine metropolitan areas in Brazil are located on the coast. In 1990, Rio de Janeiro had 9.6 million inhabitants; Recife 2.5 million; Salvador 2.4 million; Fortaleza 2.2 million; and Santos 1.3 million inhabitants. In addition, many State capitals are also on the coast: São Luís (655 000); Natal (606 000); Maceió (626 000); Vitória (523 000); João Pessoa (695 000); and Florianópolis (254 000). Many of these coastal cities have a high demographic growth, attracting migrants from the hinterland and a high percentage of these migrants live in favelas (slum areas in Salvador, Fortaleza and Rio de Janeiro).
Coastal cities are expanding as poor people migrate from the countryside, where the modernization of Brazilian agriculture has led to an increasing concentration of productive land in the hands of a small number of landowners and groups, both national and multinational. With the expulsion of small landowners and peasants from the countryside, slum areas have been established in large coastal cities. Most sewage systems are inadequate, resulting in increasing pollution of coastal rivers, estuaries, lagoons and bays.
As road transportation has the highest priority in Brazil’s transportation system, many highways have been constructed along the coast. One clear example is the BR-101 built in the 1970s, which links many coastal capitals. During the construction process, many beaches and mangrove areas were damaged as the road was built along the coast between Santos and Rio de Janeiro. These coastal roads have also encouraged the construction of villas by tourists, and have displaced many small-scale fishing villages to inland and to the mangrove areas, resulting in the destruction of the Atlantic Forest.
Oil exploration and production is an important economic activity along the Brazilian coast, which started in 1973. The main oil drilling areas along the coast are in Campos (Rio de Janeiro), Sergipe, Piauí, Rio Grande do Norte, Amazon basin and Recôncavo Baiano. Over 56% of the oil produced in Brazil comes from marine basins. There are important harbours where oil is brought ashore, the most important of which is situated in São Sebastião (São Paulo), where tourism, fisheries, mangroves and other coastal habitats suffer from frequent oil spills in the area. Coal is also produced in the coastal area of Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul. Reefs are also exploited for construction, mainly along the northeastern coast.
Tourism and recreation have become among the most important factors influencing the use of coastal areas and resources. Around 1.6 million foreign tourists visit the country annually, in particular the coastal tourist resorts, generating US$1.55 billion and roughly 1.4 million jobs. In 1992, the Brazilian Agency for Tourism (EMBRATUR) established a National Plan for Tourism that created several tourism development centres in coastal areas. In 1991, SUDENE and EMBRATUR created the Programme for the Development of Tourism (PRODETUR) and requested a US$1.6 billion loan from the Inter-American Development Bank. This large programme is directed along the northeastern coast, involving the construction of large hotels, roads, improvement of airports and urban infrastructure, such as water and sewage. This programme follows the intensive use of the coastline, which exists today in Cancún, Mexico. The ecological and social impacts of this programme have not yet been properly assessed, but social and ecological groups in the area are reacting against it, since local communities and the environment suffer the most.
In addition to the increasing degradation of inshore and coastal environments, overfishing is affecting the large stocks of shrimps, lobsters, catfish and sardines that are shared between artisanal and industrial fisheries. A recent analysis of the status of fisheries resources targeted by artisanal fisheries revealed that the percentage of collapsed stocks increases from north to south, and are in the order of 3% in the north, 12% in the northeast, 29% in the southeast and 32% in the south.
