Local experiences in community managementIn some areas, fishers and coastal communities are doing their own community-based management. In Ceará, for instance, local communities are suffering from the invasion of their beaches by land speculation, tourism and from overfishing of lobster, mainly by the industrial fleet and by divers coming from a neighbouring state. Assisted by local NGOs and research institutions, they have proposed a Coastal Forum, where the various problems are discussed by representatives of local communities, the tourism sector, the industrial fisheries sector and the federal, state and municipal governments. Within this forum they have proposed a management plan for lobster fishing, also in coordination with the industrial fisheries sector. When IBAMA announced that no funds and boats were available for surveillance of lobster fishing, the fishers equipped one of their boats in order to ensure compliance with the rules that regulate that fishery. The fishers who disobey the regulations are first reprimanded and when they violate the agreed legislation again, they are taken to a court. In some beaches, the selling of a plot of land to tourists must be approved by the community council.
In other coastal communities, such as Pirajubaé in Santa Catarina, Mandira-Cananéia in São Paulo, and Arraial do Cabo in Rio de Janeiro, MERs are being built in order to ensure access to fisheries resources for the members, and limit the access to outsiders, mainly to sport fishermen. In most of these initiatives, there is a strong resource conservation component, and as result they frequently succeed in getting the support of government and non-government environmental organizations. Further south, in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, 21 institutions have created a co-management arrangement (Forum of Patos Lagoon) to seek local solutions to the main conflicts faced by artisanal fishers, such as the impact of industrial fisheries, the control of access to outsiders, and the minimization of conflicts with industrial and port activities on the coast.
Traditional knowledge and traditional fisheries managementThe different coastal cultures in Brazil each have a set of knowledge and management practices associated with the sea and fishing activities. In recent years, researchers have emphasised the importance of the knowledge produced and orally transmitted by traditional fishers and the potential role traditional fishing and related environmental knowledge can play for the development and implementation of fisheries management in the modern world (Ruddle, 2000; Cordell, 2000a, 2000b). As Ruddle (2000) points out, traditional knowledge continues to guide and sustain the management of many traditional, community-based fishing systems, as well as governing fishing decisions and fishing strategies.
Various maritime anthropology and ethno-ichthyology studies illustrate the richness and resilience of artisanal fishing knowledge in Brazil. Silva (1997b) records the analytical categories of the fishers of Piratininga (Rio de Janeiro) and Begossi (1997) documents the species nomenclature and criteria for fish classification system used by fishers on Búzios Island (São Paulo). Cunha (1992) has described how fishing knowledge operates among artisanal communities and depicted the know-how of fishers in Paraná and along the Paraíba Coast. Diegues (2000) explains how traditional knowledge functions in the rocky fishing grounds of Rio Grande do Norte and Espírito Santo states. Kalikoski and Vasconcellos (2007) highlight the importance of fishers’ ecological knowledge in the definition of management rules in the co-management of artisanal fisheries in the Patos Lagoon, Rio Grande do Sul. Forman (1970), Cordell (1983), Mourão (1971) and Marques, (2001) have made important contributions to the study of traditional knowledge in Brazil.
Knowledge of the marine physical environment is extremely important for safe navigation, for the use of appropriate gear, and for the identification of certain fish species. This traditional knowledge is not evenly distributed among artisanal fishers but tends to be concentrated in the hands of boat captains and skippers and it is transmitted through different ways (Marques, 2001).
The numerous advantageous uses of artisanal sea-tenure systems do not imply that they present a panacea for overcoming all fisheries management problems. Fishing may become highly competitive and confrontational in the work setting. It seems to have an inherent tendency to generate conflict. The act of appropriating and controlling access to local sea space and resources by no means renders work environments free of conflicts.
Traditional sea tenure and fisheries management are only now receiving significant attention from scholars, scientists and fisheries managers in Brazil. One reason for this lack of interest is that vast areas of the country, such as the Amazon and the sea, were treated by powerful industrial and urban elites as ‘empty spaces’. Traditional populations of the Amazon, particularly the Indians and the riverside populations, were ‘invisible’ until recently. This ‘invisibility’ served the ideological purpose of the elites wishing to exploit the Amazon, as only ‘uncivilized people’ were living there. The same biased view was applied to artisanal fishers and their communities. When the Indians and the artisanal fishers started to react to outsider intrusion, often by force, they became ‘visible’, as did their rich culture and knowledge of ecosystems and management techniques.
In many cases, traditional sea tenure and traditional management strategies have been negatively affected and even abandoned as a result of increasing disruption of fishing communities and impacts of various activities.
First, artisanal fisheries face today strong competition from industrial fisheries and from the destructive exploitation of the coast. Local fisheries are being flooded with large industrial boats using inappropriate gear. Social, spatial and technological competition is ongoing between locals and outsiders. Since 1967, industrial fishing has been established using tax incentives and suspension of import fees on fishery technology. These incentives have benefited mainly industrial groups. The result of this ‘fishery modernization’ has been widespread destruction of fish habitats, overfishing and marginalization of artisanal fishers. At the same time, uncontrolled use of land and sea resources reached a critical intensity. Large chemical and petrochemical plants, nuclear power stations, dredging of harbours, oil exploitation, coastal mining and tourism have threatened extensive areas along the Brazilian coast. Urban expansion and tourism have targeted biologically rich habitats such as mangroves, sand barriers and islands. One of the most affected ecosystems are the mangroves, from which an estimated two thirds of the fish caught in Brazil feed or breed during their life cycles.
In addition to these impacts on artisanal fisheries, there has been a dramatic increase in the demand for fish in the growing urban centres. Some valuable fish species, such as shrimp and lobsters, are more intensively exploited. When profitability decreased, most industrial fishing crews started exploiting fish resources with no respect for existing traditional regulations. In some cases, artisanal fishers started using the same forbidden fishing gear in order to survive.Third, traditional sea tenure is threatened as well by erroneous environmental and aquaculture plans that should benefit artisanal fishers in principle. Government institutions are encouraging aquaculture; however, traditional extensive aquaculture systems already used by artisanal fishers are very often not considered. As a result, in some cases capital owners and outsiders are the only ones who benefit from these initiatives. The government also promoted the cultivation of species already managed by artisanal fishers. The adoption of these techniques does not necessarily lead to an improvement in the well-being of local communities. For instance, the government planned to introduce mullet cultivation through floating nets (cercos flutuantes) instead of supporting the existing technique of the traditional cerco made of bamboo poles. In fact, floating nets are more capital intensive, less labour intensive and would disrupt the existing social organization. In the end, the new technique was eventually rejected by artisanal fishers.
Environmentally protected areas in regions traditionally used by artisanal fishers are often perceived by them as threats. The well-conserved areas of the Atlantic Forest and associated coastal system have been used by traditional communities for centuries. Due to their isolation, as well as to the existing social structure of these communities, those areas have remained well conserved. However, due to existing legislation, traditional populations cannot live in the regions that became protected and have to be transferred to other areas. Highly conflictive situations are being created in almost all protected areas and local communities resist eviction from their traditional land. This is the case in the Ecological Station of Juréia, the Biological Reserve of Guaraqueçaba, the National Park of Lagoa do Peixe, and other areas. When eviction of traditional people occurs, environmentally protected areas are more easily invaded by commercial fishing and logging, and the overall situation becomes even worse.
Instead of using traditional knowledge, some environmental agencies are in fact destroying a suitable basis for environmental and social planning. The present situation is gradually changing in favour of traditional communities, particularly due to the fierce resistance of the traditional people of the Amazon. Rubber-tappers and Indians succeeded in convincing the federal government to create extractive reserves through which the traditional use of forest products is ensured. Other traditional populations of the coastal areas are now requesting the same treatment granted to the rubber-tappers. Now the concept of extractive reserve is by law applicable to other ecosystems where local populations live out of extractive activities, such as oyster and mussel extraction (see section on Coastal Marine Protected Areas).
The institution with the highest authority for coastal zone management in Brazil is the National Programme for Coastal Management (GERCO), which is administered by the Ministry of the Environment. The conditions set forth in the programme have to be implemented by each coastal state and municipality. The programme defines the legal aspects for the management of the Brazilian coastal zone, and establishes the basis for the development of regional and local policies, programmes and management plans. Although fisheries are important coastal resources, GERCO has no mandate over them.
Social movements and institutional arrangements for coastal managementSince the middle of the 1970s, public concern for coastal conservation has gathered momentum in Brazil. Some of the factors that explain this rising concern are:(a) The growing awareness of Brazilian society about the ecological importance of the coastal area and the increasing degradation of coastal ecosystems. The earlier positions of the Brazilian Government, which led to the country’s moniker: ‘Brazil welcomes polluting industries’, has changed since the Stockholm Conference in 1972. This is due to pressure from non-governmental organizations, international institutions and mainly because of the growing awareness of the population concerning environmental issues. In the 1970s, despite the presence of an authoritarian military regime favouring industrialization at any social or ecological cost, many environmental groups were created. In the final years of the military regime (until 1984), national campaigns were organized by environmental movements on issues such as the destruction of the Amazon and Atlantic Forests, the Pantanal wetlands, pollution in urban centres (such as São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro), and the establishment of nuclear plants along the coast. Hundreds of small groups blossomed to oppose whale hunting, tree cutting in urban areas and destruction of national parks. Although many of these groups were formed by the middle class and were urban biased, they were instrumental in raising the level of environmental awareness in the country. They succeeded in electing a few representatives in the state legislatures of the more urbanized states such as São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Rio Grande do Sul. In 1986, some candidates with strong environmental concern were elected to the National Congress, which developed the 1988 Constitution. For the first time specific considerations of the conservation of coastal ecosystems were included in the Constitution.