In different regions of Brazil, mainly in the northeast and the north, women have traditionally participated in fishing activities by harvesting shellfish (marisqueiras), or fishing along the seashore (pescadeiras). Women also have been the main labour force in the processing of fish in artisanal and industrial fisheries. Until the 1988 Constitution, women were not legally permitted to work in fisheries, which were considered a male activity. SUDEPE only allowed women to work as harvesters of shellfish or algae. It was only in 1988 that a presidential act abolished the prohibition on female labour in fisheries. In spite of the legalization controlling their role, women rarely participate in deep-sea fishing, since fishers consider that their presence on board a boat will bring bad luck (panema). This situation is slowly changing and in some states of the north and the northeast regions some women work with their families in small-scale fishing. There are also cases of widows who work alone in artisanal fishing boats. Some of these women are now even presidents of fishers’ guilds; however, these are still isolated cases.
The majority of women work as shellfish harvesters, selling the yield to increase the domestic income. In some states of the northeast region, such as Bahia, approximately 20 000 marisqueiras participate actively in earning domestic income. In states such as Maranhão, northern Brazil, women participate in fishing ‘on foot’ with small shrimp nets. The shrimp is brined, dried and sold by the women. This activity is also common in other states of Brazil. The activity of women is also important in some fishing communities where they weave and darn the fishing nets. In many other communities, women work in small-scale agriculture, producing yucca flour, which is the basic diet of coastal populations in many areas. Urban industrial employment is another field where women are active participants, working in the fish processing industry. In many cases the workforce is almost entirely female.
The role of women in fishing activities has decreased in some cases due to technological changes and overexploitation of coastal resources. Women who take an active part in fishing still maintain their traditional status – their activities are viewed as ‘support’ in running the household. The majority of the fishers’ guilds maintain the traditional gender division of labour. The ‘double-workday’ of women continues to be thought of as ‘part-time activity’. A woman involved in the administration of the colônias is still considered a little ‘out of place’.
There are recent trends in the role of women in fisheries, which are worth mentioning. During the past five years, in the state of Pará, women have attained more than 10% of the registered members of the guilds. They are also seeking alternatives to traditional set-ups like the colônias. Several women’s associations have flourished, providing women the possibility of holding positions of higher political/administrative importance. There have been several factors motivating women to unite and form associations, including the need to generate income and explore alternative avenues to do so. Government programmes and the initiatives of non-governmental bodies working with small producer groups have also influenced these women’s organizations. Groups that already existed in the community (mostly linked to the Catholic Church, such as Mothers’ Clubs, Grassroot Ecclesiastical Communities) are enthusiastically supporting these new associations.
In the colônias where women are admitted, integration occurred naturally. Once groups are formed, the exchange of ideas and access to new social spaces induced a reconsideration of traditional roles. These groups tend to follow examples set by other organizations that have been successful in welcoming women. During the 1990s, other various organizations supported and strengthened the role of women in fishing, such as the Fisher’s Pastoral, the National Movement of Fishers (MONAPE) and several NGOs (i.e. Terramar, supported by the International Collective in Support of Fishworkers) (Maneschy, 1999).
Socio-economic data on artisanal coastal fisheries are generally scarce. The situation deteriorated even more after the termination of SUDEPE in 1989. There are several reasons for the scarcity of socio-economic information. One cause is the dispersion of fishing communities along the coast, which makes the task of collecting information extremely difficult. Another factor that has hampered the development of programmes to evaluate the socio-economic status of artisanal fisheries is governmental priority in the industrial sector. This support to industrial fisheries has been a detriment to the artisanal sector. Among the main data deficiencies are those concerning economic aspects of the fishery, such as employment and income level, types of technologies employed, and organizational aspects of fishing communities. Some small improvements in data availability have been observed in recent years when governmental welfare programmes began to collect and disseminate information on the fishers who applied for benefits, such as the unemployment benefit received by fishers during fishing closures.
In terms of fishers’ productivity, the available data from SUDEPE, Fishers Confederation and IBGE indicate that productivity increased from 1.49 tonnes per fisher in 1967 to 1.81 tonnes per fisher in 1986 and decreased to 1.12 tonnes per fisher in 2000. The decrease in the last 15 years could be caused by the depletion of coastal resources, as well as other factors, such as the increase in the number of people participating in the fishery (including, in recent years, non-fishers that fish as an alternative source of income) and the consequent reduction in the productivity per individual fisher.
The infrastructure for landing, storage and commercialization of fish is very precarious. In general, the large ports have no infrastructure to accommodate landings from artisanal fisheries. In many fishing communities, especially in the northeast, fish is landed on the beach and from there it enters a long chain of dealers until it gets to local/regional markets. The situation seems to be even worse in fishing communities close to urban centres, because they lack adequate structures to land and process fish in urban conditions. Past experiences in the northeast in the construction of fisheries production facilities for landing and cold-storage associated with cooperatives (funded during the 1980s by the Inter-American Development Bank [IDB]) did not work satisfactorily. The vast majority of these facilities ended up in the hands of middlemen. At the same time, many cooperatives failed because they were formed in a rush, without the proper evaluation of the administrative capacity of fishing communities and of market demands. More recent experiences in the northeast with the ‘Pro-Renda’ (a governmental programme that aims to increase the income level of poorer communities) seem to be more successful than the previous experiences with cooperatives. The programme is based on strengthening the existing fishers’ guilds, improving techniques to maintain the quality of fish on board using freezers, and developing new markets for artisanal fisheries production. Fish marketing, improvement of the quality of fisheries products, and the processes of intermediation within the market chain continue to be the critical points for the development of artisanal fisheries and increasing the income levels of artisanal fishers.
Fishing livelihoods are not homogeneous along the coast. Along the northern coast, many fishers combine fishing with agriculture. In the northeast, most fishers depend exclusively on fisheries. Their livelihoods are under threat from the rapid expansion of shrimp aquaculture, tourism and urban development, as well as from overfishing of important stocks. Along the southern and southeastern coast, there are clear signs of depletion of most stocks, as well as environmental degradation which requires mechanisms of control and regulation. In the past, many fishers who lived in coastal villages also maintained other activities such as small-scale agriculture, forestry and handcrafting. With the increasing level of conflict with industrial fisheries, along with the expansion of urbanization and tourism, many artisanal fishers have turned to aquaculture or to working in general services in cities.
The urbanization of artisanal fishers (i.e. the move of fishers from rural to urban areas) is a phenomenon evident in many states, particularly in the southeastern and southern regions. Even in the 1970s, approximately 70% of fishers in these regions lived in or around urban centres. In contrast, in the northern and northeastern states, most fishers lived in coastal villages while only 44% lived in urban centres. Although there is a general lack of information, it is probably correct to assume that today most coastal artisanal fishers live in or close to urban areas, with the exception of fishing communities in northern Brazil and in the states of Maranhão and Piaui. According to data available in the IBGE database for 1991, the level of urbanization reaches 22% in certain areas of Maranhão, 48.5% in Ceará, 62.5% in Paraíba, 70% in Rio de Janeiro, 83.5% in Santa Catarina and 98% in São Paulo. The increasing level of urbanization of artisanal fishers has many drivers, including mounting economic pressure from the tourism industry that led to the appropriation of coastal areas from fishing communities; the shift from agriculture and other extractive activities; the lack of basic infrastructure to support fishing activities (e.g. supply of ice and diesel) and the lack of access to basic social services (e.g. health and education) in coastal villages compared with urban centres; the proximity to markets in the cities; and the implementation of environmental conservation units along the coast that expelled many fishers from their traditional fishing areas. Fishers that have moved to cities are often involved in urban activities (construction, general services, tourism, etc.) to complement their earnings during fishing closures.
Fishers’ access to infrastructure and to social services is normally precarious in coastal communities as well as in urban zones. Table 2 compares some statistics that characterize the living conditions in certain artisanal fishing communities of selected coastal states.
The information provided by fishers that applied for unemployment benefits in 2003 (Ministério do Trabalho e Emprego) indicates that the illiteracy rate is 44.6% among men and 53.5% among women. Only 9% of men and women have completed elementary-level education and only approximately 1% completed high school. These figures indicate that the educational level of fishers is extremely low and well below the national average. From the same source of data it is estimated that only 13% of fishers are less than 30 years old, which reveals the difficulty of recruiting young members of the community into the fishery.
Most of the frozen fish traded in large cities in supermarkets is imported or is supplied by commercial fishing industries. Artisanal fisheries production is generally traded in coastal towns and regional centres. Most of the crabs, mussels, oysters and other shellfish originate from artisanal fisheries, and marketing is sometimes done through cooperatives. In Santa Catarina (in southern Brazil), many small-scale fishers are becoming oyster cultivators, partly due to the decrease in fish stocks. Mussels are also being cultivated by small-scale fishers along the northern coast of São Paulo.
